Coleman this is the season finale
episode 14.
and it is the David Deutsch episode wow
this is better than season finale
Breaking Bad and lost combined
uh should I tell you Heavens my God Jay
Jesus Christ dragged me for for uh Harry
Potter yet really I've seen a little bit
of Breaking Bad I watch a lot of TV I
feel like we have some some British fans
that could drag you from Harry with
because of Harry Potter in the accent I
escaped it so far interesting
um but so we've been hyping this episode
like all year correction you've been
hiding I've been hyping it but I have a
confession to make to start the episode
I I keep putting it off and I've kept
putting it off not because I think it's
so good
but I'm terrified of it I'm actually
terrified of this episode and not
because of anything David Deutsch says
uh I think David Deutsch is an
impenetrable thinker and I do the
responsibility that I have of trying to
even
present his ideas to you or the audience
is Way Beyond what I'm capable of doing
so I'm gonna it up all right and I
just encourage everybody to read the
beginning of infinity like I I literally
I can I've read the book three times I I
understand some of it but every single
line of this book could basically be a
book on its own it's just like
confounding mind-blowing idea after
another one and they all make sense
which is why it should be easy to
explain to you but they're all just so I
don't know
there's so much in that book just go
read the video I honestly think it's
like on the level of Origin of Species
as far as influential wow thinking and
and books that should be read and
changed the way that we think about
things I think Sam Harris and Steve
Pinker really like that book right I
mean everyone should yeah he's been on
Sam's podcast I think three times and
every time sort of like I think he had
the line to Sam of something like the
sentence you just said is wrong in three
different ways and it's such a David
Deutsch because he's intimidating
because he's so clear but then he's also
very humble which I'll get into about
his philosophies
um but he start using that sentence on
you because I'm just wrong
yes and then I'll explain it and be like
oh
um but it's true and honestly some of
some of Sam's blind spots of thinking
David just like blows up if you actually
understand David it's been on things
like AI where Sam is just mistaken and
wrong
um why we don't have ai but like you
could start with David deutschen totally
different path so I don't I don't know
where to begin okay and the other thing
about this I'll say since this is our
finale the show has sort of evolved and
I've learned a little bit about what it
should be or should be doing as the
season has gone on
um I sort of we've as everyone has
noticed I think we've sort of gone away
from the traditional like here's the
Dilemma here's how it's read here's what
we think about it they've sort of
drifted into like here's the topic we're
talking about we're gonna we're gonna
like break it down there actually is a
specific dilemma notice that but it did
we did like at the beginning
breeding it which I might go back to a
little in season two some of those are
really fun of just like here's the
trolley problem do your thing
um but some of the thinkers and people
we've had on uh I guess let me defend
why I think that's useful
I'm really interested in the sort of
Foundations and how how people are
building their moral philosophies from
the ground up and like if I if I get
your base moral philosophy I think I've
said this before about Consciousness if
I get somebody's instinct or philosophy
around something like the theory of mind
I can almost perfectly predict how
you're going to answer a moral dilemma
about something like should you eat meat
or not depending on what you think about
Consciousness so with most of these
topics it's almost like instead of just
staying on the output of like here's the
dilemma and here's how you answer it and
then we're going to argue about it it's
almost I want to go deeper into how do
you start building your moral
foundations in the first place
um so there is a but there is a specific
Dilemma to talk about on this one
although in the conversation it's like
we go everywhere I think even in the
last episode with Matthew Crawford you
express maybe some frustration because
it wasn't it wasn't in the end sort of a
policy discussion of should we have
self-driving cars or not it was much
more of a psycho ecological
investigation and Philosophical
Investigation into the Transformations
that Society undergoes when we introduce
something like self-driving cars even if
we all admit if we had to be forced into
a policy sort of decision that we would
all be in favor of them who we would all
move toward we would call it progress of
introducing men
um this episode would probably be
similar because the specific dilemma I
think is actually good and
fascinating it's it's something like
um I could read it exactly but I don't
even have to there's a couple a married
couple named Andre and Leslie I only say
that because we reference their names
named Andre and Leslie who are both deaf
and this is in a a near future world
where we have the ability to genetically
sort of Select traits for our unborn
children
from a whole menu and in that world
Andre and Leslie
want to select for the traits of their
unborn baby to be deaf so they
intentionally want to have a deaf child
so and they argue for it
um saying you know like Deaf culture is
beautiful they want to connect with
their baby more and that's sort of their
their wish is to have a deaf child and
so
I think on its face is just a
fascinating question and goes in a lot
of different directions and David and I
get there and we talk about it but like
again I'm terrified of this episode
because in order to talk about David
Deutsch's philosophies and even hear
them on his own you have to sort of just
understand the way David Deutsch thinks
about the universe
from step one and I don't even know
where that to begin with that what do
you know anything about David Deutsch
and his sort of like instinct about
knowledge physicist or mathematician
yeah let me start I know why Pinker
likes him why does Pinker like him
um based on what I remember from
Enlightenment now Pinker quotes him in
the context of solutions to problems
creating new problems yes which is a
Carl popper idea actually okay yeah and
that seems like a banality to say it
seems sort of like a platitude but one
gets the sense that there's some
profundity behind it that's it's like a
some kind of like Axiom and and it seems
like a lot of deutschisms are like that
like if you if you just see the one
sentence description you're like oh that
seems right but like why is that
brilliant yeah but probably there's some
very deep like mathematical or
physics-based logic behind his
platitudes yeah more than more than and
sometimes that's a great way of putting
it sometimes you don't need you don't
need the math or even the physics they
they seem like obvious sentences that
then have profound implications
sometimes they're so obvious that you
missed it here's one a lot of his work
is cleaning up the messes that we all
are live with and making philosophically
in the scientific world and in the moral
world and every other world two of the
really really big ones that he
takes down in a chapter called the spark
it's the third chapter of that book are
are two things that we take for granted
one is this chemical scum notion to say
that we're just an animal on a typical
star in a typical part of the universe
and we're just atoms and we're just
dude not important he calls it the
principle of mediocrity which feels very
intuitive and you can almost get some
moral sort of uh flavor to that of like
Get over yourself you're not such a big
deal the other one is this spaceship
earth uh statement that has a lot of
environmentalism in it of a realizing
that we're an evolved animal and we've
evolved in this environment and there
must be the environment is here to take
care of us the Earth is a sort of life
support system for us as an organism
and so if we push too far in either
direction the life support system breaks
and then we will all die and he he start
with the principle of mediocrity
um he destroys that and takes that down
even though it is true from some level
but think of it this way
knowledge and knowledge creation is the
most significant phenomenon in the
universe so picture just like the atoms
of a universe and you're watching some
planet from really far away and you just
see the atoms moving around and it's all
sort of explainable by completely
explainable by the laws of physics if
you knew them all
and then suddenly some Monumental thing
happens like a little ship goes to the
the moon or the entire uh Planet just
transforms itself into a giant computer
or something that seems to break the
laws of physics like even on Earth oil
it's like dinosaur blood basically
buried deep in the earth suddenly comes
up from the bottom and then ends up in
all of our cars the only thing to
explain the phenomenon of that you can't
explain it using just physics you
explain it through there must be
knowledge there of how to do that thing
which again sounds very
um plain and simple like of course
there's knowledge but
it places just on a physical level as a
physicist the the appearance of
knowledge as the most significant
phenomenon in the universe forget
Supernova forget other thing out the
creation of knowledge and the the
arrival of knowledge
transforms the universe like nothing
else and that immediately places humans
or let's not instead of humans persons
people that have the ability to create
that knowledge at the center of a sort
of moral universe
so like again it seems like a very basic
thing to say
but then the implications become huge
and it all it's I find his book
empowering and um
all of his work very we'll get to his
thoughts on optimism but
um just what's what's even the word for
it energizing about our
possibilities that corrects I think what
he calls a philosophical pessimism that
is just an epidemic in our society of
that word we're just another animal and
we're not special in fact no we actually
are we have a huge responsibility for
that
um so I don't know like that to your
your instinct is right that it's like a
basic statement about like oh knowledge
is important but it's like wait a minute
think about that and think about that
hard and actually make it strange and
then start there so I don't know cool
yeah I don't know what to say about that
and so we'll jump into it because again
this is going to be I'm terrified of
this episode I think I probably already
it up uh David will probably
already correct everything that I've
said because he's very precise with his
language uh which I appreciate and even
the way I was asking him how he would
want me to introduce him
and he had a lot of things but what he
ended up saying is is this let me just
play it
like Carl popper I don't really believe
in subjects right so he says one
shouldn't speak in terms of subjects but
in terms of problems
so I can more easily say what I'm
interested in rather than what subject
that is right so even that is is his
what problems are you interested what
problems are you trying to solve
very much I think one of the reasons Sam
Harris likes him a lot is that they
agree on the unification of knowledge
and when you go on a college campus and
see different departments it's it's sort
of a bad habit that we have where
knowledge is actually unified at some
level and that's the real Quest and
knowledge from one Department
inevitably and should bleed into other
departments and he thinks that points to
evidence of sort of uh an objective
notion of progress and knowledge again
we could talk about all those ideas
about the the reach of explanations in
those things
I I just have to start playing it and
we'll just have to start talking I guess
yeah I don't know
before we get into this couple I guess
their names are Andre and Leslie in the
hypothetical who want to have this deaf
child engineer it we're probably going
to spend a lot of time talking about the
foundations of of morality
and how you even approach some of those
problems
I'm going to try to frame what I think I
understand some of your arguments in
your your recent book the beginning of
infinity about morality are is that you
guess I'll start with this and then
clean it up for me you guess that there
are objective truths in the space of
morality to to be discovered that are
maybe just as discoverable fundamentally
as something like
um the atoms in this table between us
yes and my guess about that has the same
status in my mind as my guess that you
exist or that I exist it's just realism
right and so what what is the the
grounding of that so like in that book
you you seem to try to bind everything
through your very expansive definition
of explanation is that still at the
ground of that yes okay it is and
um I I think the
um
the reason for realism that binds all
the realisms together in in in in your
terms is
um that the arguments against it
are all the same in in every field and
they are all fallacious in every field
so all of them are like well how can you
possibly know
how can you possibly know that in in
science the the skeptical argument is
um well uh your theories might seem to
work but how do you know that's not an
error it's always possible that that
you're mistaken you could be dreaming uh
the the world could be misleading there
could be a demon out there and
um
and that that works on the biggest level
like you could be completely mistaken
about everything like Descartes try to
try to reason from or it could be
particular things you know how do you
know that global warming is happening
and uh and fro so from the smallest
thing to the largest thing now the same
is true with with uh philosophical ideas
you know that people say
um how can you uh know what is right and
wrong when you can't see it but well
they forget that you can't see physical
facts either you can you can only see
your sense Impressions and even those
you don't see for what they are
so that there are only crackles in the
nerves but you you never experience
those so so everything is behind
um a a structure of explanation
and you can make the argument that
explanation in itself is is uh a conceit
uh is is worthless and what you should
really do is consult the holy book or or
your feelings or whatever but those are
all mistakes and they're all the same
mistake in all these areas in in
Morality in mathematics as well they're
the intuitionists and and so on it's
it's all the same mistake and I'm so I'm
a realist in all these areas and all for
the same reason right and that mistake
is is usually tied towards some sort of
empiricism instrumentalism mistake I
know if you mind sort of just extracting
that so the mistake uh the specific
mistake in the case of science
um is empiricism the the mistake in term
in in say morality yeah is it could also
be called empiricism it's not usually
called that but you might call it
scientism
um or you might call it um physics Envy
uh but really it's it's the same thing
it I suppose uh Carl poppa would say
they are all striving for foundations
for Authority that can't possibly exist
and they they assume that without
Authority ideas are worthless
without foundations they're worthless so
I I reject all authority in regard to
ideas and and all foundations
the reason I think this dilemma in
particular if it is a dilemma uh I'm
really interested in your take in
particular as we started to dance around
some of the reasons this is going to get
real messy I'm sure good yeah like all
things probably in Morality are so when
I when I am thinking about this couple
that wants to intentionally select for
deafness and bring a bring about a deaf
Consciousness whatever that that means
um and I think about your your arguments
in your your book I'm thinking about
specifically how you view evidence and
if you don't mind giving me your sort of
description and definition of evidence
in the view of sort of your explanation
um because it's going to get messy it
feels to me that
I would guess that you would be you
would guess that this is a a immoral
action to take because it would be
denying someone access to a certain kind
of evidence in the universe by denying
them the sensory experience of hearing
but that that might be too simplistic of
a reading of your view of well
I'm personally revolted by the idea but
I wouldn't jump to saying that it's it's
absolutely immoral
um uh let alone advocating that it be
illegal
but uh well you'll see when we get into
it more that that I I think this is a
complicated issue involving more than
just theories of morality as far as I
understand it this is what I try to do a
lot on the show was I misunderstand it
and then you the expert tells me that
I've misunderstood it okay
um as far as I understand your view of
conjecture the this is it's something
like we notice a phenomenon in the
universe and we conjecture an
explanation that would well yes we
notice a problem a problem and the
problem is in our minds now it may
relate to the universe okay
um a problem is a conflict between ideas
so for example we noticed something and
uh we can't think why it happens and it
and it seems weird and so that's a
conflict between what we think we saw
and what we think ought to have been
there
so that's a conflict now if we also
think that that's interesting or
important or or fruitful or whatever
we'll pursue it further by making
conjectures and conjectures are always
of the form that one or other of the
conflicting ideas is either false or
inadequate
so it could be or they could both they
could both be false and inadequate so
and what we're trying to do and that
that would be an error then in our
conception of the world and what we're
trying to do always is correct errors by
making
conjectures that don't have the problem
if they replace or or augment our ideas
they the resulting uh structure won't
have the problem right uh that we
thought we saw sometimes we think we see
a problem but the answer is that it
wasn't a problem and so on right and so
you bring up things like
um well the problem of Seasons happening
yes in your local environment and then
the act of conjecturing a explanation
that would solve this problem yes in
that instance is an act of what you
would call just pure creativity exactly
yeah exactly and then is where this
notion of evidence comes in because if I
have a conjecture you bring up something
like the gods did it with some elaborate
Story versus let's say you have a
conjecture being like yeah I think the
Earth has an axial tilt yes well there's
the conjecture and then there's
criticism usually even before the
evidence okay so some some conjectures
can be rejected just for example just
because they don't solve the problem you
think they will solve the problem and
they say oh well but even if the
conjecture is true the problem is
unchanged so that didn't address the
problem uh but but then the the
conjectures that survive this criticism
then then there is evidence if it's if
it's a scientific matter if it's a
matter of what the physical world is
like then uh we can look for evidence uh
to in in the hope that it will uh refute
one of the competing ideas that that
still doesn't solve the problem because
we've still got to conjecture a
replacement
for it uh but if if we have two ideas
and it and it refutes one of them then
we're home right
so like so to use the seasons example
because I think that was probably a good
one to to extrapolate
um what can you talk about what would
constitute evidence then if to decide in
your in your definition yeah which
conjecture or explanation is a good one
versus a bad one
there's a problem uh which is uh ancient
people the the seasons and the weather
were very important to them but they
didn't have anything in their world view
that indicated why one season uh morphed
into another
so uh they wanted to understand it as
many ways as possible for the purpose of
preparing for seasons and crops and
whatever
and
um they realized that there's nothing in
the phenomenon of winter
that seems to foreshadow
that spring will come so you know
sometimes it was late
and uh so it was a bit terrifying it's
something they wanted to understand also
by the time they got philosophical it's
it's a very interesting problem so what
what is it that's different
um at the end of the winter from the
beginning what has happened there as I
say in my book uh obvious Solutions are
that what's different is that there is
someone causing the winter and they've
they've changed their mind or that
they've achieved their purpose for the
winter and then they go on to another
purpose just like humans do the trouble
with that as I say in my book is is that
it doesn't really explain anything
people often say it's not testable but
but that theory is testable
um because it implies that seasons are
the same all over the world
um and so it could be refuted by making
an expedition to somewhere else in the
world and seeing that the Caesars are
not in sync what's really wrong with
that explanation is nothing to do with
evidence it's it's to do with the the
fact that it it could easily be replaced
by by a completely different causality
different gods or not gods or whatever
and and therefore
if you did have ever even if you did
have evidence against it you could
easily dismiss it by by just changing
the details of the theory the details
aren't implicated in the explanation
so the true explanation on the other
hand which is the the tilt of the axis
of the Earth tells you exactly what's
different about the end of the winter
from the beginning
and the namely that the the Earth has
moved round in its orbit around the Sun
but the the axis hasn't changed its
orientation that theory
is not only testable but even before you
conceive of any test it's hard to change
there's there's only one way that a
theory like that could explain the
seasons and if it if it made the wrong
prediction it couldn't it wouldn't be
fixable
you know what you know I think would be
I'm trying to take this to your
definition of person or people yes
because I think that's what I'm trying
to like dance around to get to is this
notion if I'm getting if I'm remembering
it correctly it says a universal
Constructor
um if if that's correct a universal
explainer is is more relevant to to the
morality problem right and this child
that Andre and Lisa are requesting to be
brought into the world I'm wondering at
what sense would you answer at some
sense
if you remove all of the the sensory
input organs of a organism at what point
would it cease to be able to be a person
in that definition is does that question
yes yes it does so I don't think that
the issue of
what is a person and what has rights
should be decided by the kind of sort of
legalistic argument of what we shall
deem to to be a person
uh what is a person is a matter of fact
it's it's a an entity that is capable of
constructing explanations to to solve
problems and uh whether a thing can do
that or not is a fact
um it's not always possible to determine
that fact but that's a different issue
that's an issue of like what you would
frame the law to say because laws have
to be framed in terms of determinable
things but the morality the the the the
the the metaphysics the morality of the
situation is about what the entity can
do or to be exact
a person is not a body a person is a
mind it's a program it's a configuration
of a brain that is the person
um if I if I lose an arm in an accident
I may become a different person as a
result I may become a resentful person
or whatever but I don't become any less
a person
if if I lose an arm and if I graft it on
another arm I wouldn't become any more
of a person
if I had three or four arms or no matter
how many I had
um
um so a person is a mind which is a bit
of software not a body which is a bit of
hardware and so to play the amputation
game that you you started with yourself
yeah if I started amputee amputating
Senses at what point would that
in your definition of person remove your
no even if I'm even if I'm totally in
sensory in a sensory deprivation tank
you would still be able to create
explanation yes can you explain that how
that would be well the simplest case is
if if I'm just thinking about things
that have happened to me but but even
all that I hope will happen to me like
being let out
but uh even if I've never seen the
outside
um and grew up as it were in a sensory
deprivation tank I could still think
for example I might be a pure
mathematician and I I might think about
purely mathematical Concepts now there
is a
I think it's unknown whether
a newborn baby actually does this or
whether culture has any input into the
creative ability
now I I think it's plausible that the
creative ability starts before birth
and I also think it's plausible that it
starts sometime after birth we just
don't know and doing any experiments on
this would be horrendously immoral right
so so uh we won't know until we have a
comprehensive theory of of how
creativity Works which we don't
one of the challenges with Deutsch I've
pointed this out before is like you read
a David Deutsch book and you suddenly
can't talk to anybody
because your definition of these
seemingly mundane words like knowledge
explanation person becomes so precise
and I think accurately defined by him
that you just become paralyzed of like
starting at square one of like this is
what person means and should mean this
is what explanation means so I realize
I'm gonna probably have to do that here
because I'm lost even listening to it
yeah
it seems like his definitions are really
his
is he is he prescriptive in the sense of
saying you sh you ought to adopt my
definitions because they're
either getting at some objective truth
or is he just doing what good
philosophers do and defining his terms
so that we cannot have semantic debates
well he's certainly defining his terms
so we could get around the semantic
debates but I think he's even more
precisely pointing out that the terms
being used or here's an example
empiricism empiricism sounds like a good
word but he he takes it literally
meaning
empiricism like he puts these at the end
of all of his chapters though his like
summaries and definitions some sort of
looking at some of them here and I don't
quite have the empiricism One open in
front of me at the moment but it's it's
he calls it a mistake it's a mistaken
philosophy that basically says all
knowledge is derived from direct
experience of your senses
and you could you could almost say like
well he's just being too literal here
like of course you can't get that
information that one I understand
because that's commonly used to to
describe David hume's attitude and some
others you know so it's an empiricist
yeah yeah that definition I think is
more widely used and I think he's hewing
to the typical way of understanding that
word but with like person person yeah
let's see what other words did you use
here I mean even so explanation let me
give you some of his like what a good
explanation versus a bad explanation is
and we use the seasons example there
although there's other ones a good
explanation is an explanation that is
difficult to vary and still explains the
thing that it purports to explain a bad
explanation is one that of course that
is an easy to vary while still
explaining the thing it purports to
explain so he has a thing about watching
like a magician do a Conjuring trick and
like watching the cup and balls or
whatever and let's say you're watching
it and based on your theory of the
universe and physics or whatever else
he's about to you know remove a cop and
you expect a ball to be there and then
it's not this is what he calls a problem
right so he defines that too a problem
very literally is like conflict and
ideas something must be wrong here about
your theory so then you need to
conjecture of an explanation for it and
let's say you conjecture well it's magic
it's actual magic that actually does
explain why the ball is not there yeah
but it's so easy to vary because as if
the ball was there you could also say
It's Magic still and then I or even a
more sort of fair uh conjecture that he
brings up rather than magic is something
like you could say the magician did
something that's true that actually
explains it but it's so easy to vary
that you can do it explains again the
opposite of itself and then if I explain
or I conjecture like I think what's
happening is he's palming the ball at
the moment that he switches it and it's
so fast that we can't see it I have a
whole explanation
that's very specific so it's hard to
vary if I vary anything then you can
it's going to not explain what it's
going to explain and it might be a good
one or a bad one and then we have this
thing called evidence and as he says
even before evidence sometimes a culture
of criticism of even just logically
talking through and different modes of
criticism to figure out which conjecture
may be a good theory so even that is
like a long way to say something that
might seem obvious about good
explanations versus bad explanations but
he he grounds the
um the the Jewel of the universe and
we'll get there later but I should start
with it now so people don't get too lost
the Jewel of the universe is the Quest
for good explanations and and a person
really is borrowing the person
definition there for more the Aristotle
thing think less human and think more
the mind and if almost a
phenomenological thinker I find him to
be of the capabilities of a person
is what defines a person and the
capabilities is an entity or in his
version a software whatever it is that
has the ability to create new
explanations all of that makes sense to
me yeah I think I did it right I like
the way that
he frames it and you summarize it yeah
the one thing I'm looking out for as we
as we hear the you know the rest of his
thoughts is where the concept of
suffering well-being comes in to his
picture of morality yeah I I think I'll
have to sort of uh drag his ideas into
the realm of sort of more traditional
moral philosophy and see if they stand
and he might be even opposed to me doing
it we'll we'll try and we'll get there
later
um I agree with you because one thing
that is also maybe a bit frustrating
about about Deutsch not only is the
language sort of like you need a primer
of like learning basic words again
um but it also the applicability of it
is profound at the same time as it's
very messy and complicated and so I
don't even know if the end we're gonna
get us I think we'll get a specific
framework of how we could answer this
question but given the knowledge of the
question or the hypothetical pose about
the deaf child which we didn't even talk
about really at all in that segment is
almost unknowable at the so we'll get
there with it I wanted to also with like
the
um
the another thing to keep in mind that's
so
profound about him
um
about the philosophies and philosophies
of science that he all he calls all
mistakes in making all the same mistakes
as the anti-realism one is
um he would he calls himself a
fallibalist and infallibleism which is
really just an attitude and a commitment
to to always knowing that you could be
wrong and your theories are incomplete
which you're always in the state of
and rather than empiricism which would
have sort of a a different kind of
skepticism but but a it's a quest for
certainty
rather than a quest for knowledge so
something like empiricism and almost all
these mistakes are a quest for certainty
and when you reject certainty that you
will certainly have the Right theory of
the universe whether it's gravity or
morality or Aesthetics or anything else
um is is not to deny some people make
this mistake not to deny that there is
no such thing as progress this is
something I think you talk about a lot
like just because you don't know the
right answer doesn't mean you you don't
have objective progress along the way
and you can't know the right answer but
just to even pause that the name of this
book is beginning of infinity and he
discovers I think through thinking these
things out a lot of different kinds of
beginnings of Infinity but that's one of
my favorite ones of and he used this as
analogy which isn't original to him of
the the infinity hotel which gets very
crazy and mathematical and above my head
but there's a way to there's a way to
just start with it so think again of of
any question where you cannot be certain
and which is everything
in this attitude of fallibalism so even
if you have a great theory in hand
that's doing a great explanation
explanatory job of whatever it purports
to explain but it might have problems
and you are open to that at all times
that that's a kind of infinity and so
imagine picture you're in to to grok the
notion of infinity which is just fun to
do picture yourself in a hotel that has
an infinite number of rooms so a
corridor that that is just infinitely
long and you wake up and you're in a
room and you and you're gonna go out and
open the door in this hotel and look at
the number on the room they're just
numbered sequentially let's say whole
numbers from 0 to infinity and you look
at the number on your door no matter
what that number is
if you look to your right let's say
that's the direction of infinity
it's infinitely far to the highest
numbered room which doesn't exist
and you can see the other way and
theoretically you could see room number
one at the start so no matter where you
are in whatever room you wake up in you
will be infinitely closer to room the
first room the beginning of the hotel
than the end of the hotel so no matter
where you are and how much progress
you've made on any question you are
literally always at the beginning of
infinity and he discovers this sort of
truth of the beginning of infinity in
progress and in knowledge
everywhere but this is not today which
for for is actually rather a lovely and
liberating truth to discover because
there's always work to do literally
always work to do so he borrows this
from Carl popper of of the definition of
progress is for placing old problems
with new ones or better problems as it
were
um so
I I I I again I'm terrified still of
this episode I feel like I'm trying to
like weave through deutsches definitions
um and and I still and I'll struggle
you'll hear the entire time of bringing
it back to the deaf child and at some
point I sort of just abandoned it and
I'm like just tell me what you think
um
but
I don't know I don't I don't I don't
know ask me a question I can't I can't
like play the part of David Deutsch as
well as he does but I'm very protective
of him
yeah I mean his ideas are very
compelling I think
and nothing has struck me as wrong so
far yeah
and at the same time I'm struggling to
see
how he applies his idea how his idea
should make me think differently or in
any particular way about
morality yeah
uh I think they will with optimism let
me see if this makes sense to put here
I'm gonna have to at least I'm gonna
have a couple weeks to edit this one
because the I'm gonna be in Peru trying
to edit it
um
with
let me let me put it this way
yeah to be honest Coleman it's like his
idea I've been reading it all all day
his ideas of morality are so
tricky and as a moral realist because
he's interested in everything realist
but he's just guessing so he doesn't
know the answers here
um and he even calls himself out at some
point and he's like Mondays Wednesdays
and Fridays I think I'm a
foundationalist and the other days I'm
not like he doesn't he hasn't solved the
answer of morality here
um
but he I'll put it this way his
Definition of optimism another thing to
really keep on board in in the David
Deutsche vernacular is his Definition of
optimism is all evil is due to lack of
knowledge
which as he says is not even really a
definition of optimism but an
explanation for failure so why something
is failing is just you don't know how
you don't have the knowledge yet of how
to make it succeed again it sounds very
banal like what is he really saying
there but think about it harder and it's
profound so
the distance between
you doing something anything on any
scale that doesn't break the laws of
physics which which we're trying to
figure out is doable the only thing is
the knowledge of how to do it so
acquiring that knowledge is all you need
whether that's turning the entire solar
system into a space station that nothing
about that breaks the laws of physics
nothing but obviously there's a lot of
knowledge that you need to do in order
to get there
um and
calling it evil to not be able to do it
is
um again has a moral flavor to it but I
think one that he feels comfortable
using because maybe the obviousness of
it
um but also I'm a little bit lost where
does evil come into that yeah so like
let me an example of
um the black plague killed a whole like
a third of the population of Europe when
it happened right or let's even let's
imagine a civilization that got wiped
out by a by a plague which happened and
then may yet happen and what's that one
coronavirus oh it may yet happen yeah
well let's hope not but so let's say it
does if the coronavirus wipes us out
you could tell a lot of explanations of
why it happened but this but the truest
one or a very true one I would say that
Deutsch would say is we didn't have the
knowledge of how to stop it again it
sounds very banal but we didn't have the
knowledge of how to stop it and if we
did only the only thing I'm confused
about there is
where does the role of intention come in
so you know what if someone wants to
wipe out the human race has the
knowledge to stop coronavirus but
doesn't stop it because they enjoy
seeing things right yeah yeah and he
does point to
um that there are enemies of
civilization I I think at some point I
will say David Deutsch hasn't solved the
foundational problem of morality and
we'll admit that later in this interview
um so I think I think you have the
bootstraps that he finds are
um let's call it scientific and
mathematical proofs of progress what he
would call progress and guessing really
guessing that there are I mean he would
I don't know if he would call him I
guess but aesthetic and moral
objective progress as well
um I don't know if he'd solved that
he'll call that a bootstrap at some
point that yeah what is to say that we
ought to continue progressing versus we
ought to just intentionally stop
progressing if if a person is something
that can create explanatory knowledge
and explanatory knowledge is the only
thing that can create let's call it
um physical progress
um stopping the asteroid that comes to
hit if there's an asteroid that comes to
hit us tomorrow and it wipes us out the
only thing that stopped it from
happening
or allowed it to happen is that we
didn't have the knowledge to prevent it
to happen and you might say well what
about the intention what if someone says
intentionally I want that thing to hit
us would they be immoral the the
conjecture there is that there is such a
thing as as moral knowledge or even
political will knowledge that that would
also that would also explain it it might
be a bit of a cop-out but buy it for now
that there's a kind of moral knowledge
that we didn't have or the person who
intentionally wanted to happen that
didn't yet have that then caused that
evil to happen so yeah the word evil has
a maybe it's a bit of a cheat I don't
know but it does have a moral quality
that I think holds up there that
um you don't have to take too much on
board that an asteroid hitting us and
wiping us out and ending the the only
instance that we know of in the universe
of explanatory knowledge creation to be
erased would be a kind of
evil yeah
okay I don't know if that got us there
that helps yeah yeah I'm curious to see
where he goes me too because I don't
really remember
in the hypothetical and you know we
haven't even really concretely talked
about it directly that much yet what's
lurking around it for me is you know
we're talking about Andre and Leslie
deciding to remove a sensory sort of
experience from their their child what's
lurking around this is what if we
flipped it in a way of Imagine A A near
future where we could you know easily
raise the IQ or intelligence or
something of every you know unborn child
with a simple pill or something in that
world would it be immoral to not to not
do that something as as I guess what I'm
getting at is like is there a right and
inherent Birthright as a person to to
have as much qualia as you possibly can
so this is where I think uh the answer
to that sort of question it can't be
found entirely in Morality okay
um let's just step back a bit
um writes theory of Rights is an
approximation to to morality and and uh
so long as you're thinking in terms of
Rights it's only persons that can have
rights and rights depend on choices they
depend on the choices that a person
makes so I I may have a right to to
emigrate that doesn't mean I have to
immigrate I I have a right to free
speech that doesn't mean I have to say
things so all rights properly conceived
in in my view
our rights to choose something to choose
between something
so any rights that this deaf or hearing
child may have are to do with that
child's choices
uh you might say okay but since I've
said the the fetus the embryo uh can't
make choices so it doesn't have any
rights so it doesn't matter what you do
to it that's that's not the case you can
easily
harm someone deprive them of Rights
before they are born not because the
entity before they are born has the
rights but because they they will have
them so for example if you
um uh put poison into a hospital crib
that you know a baby will be put into
once it is born but the baby hasn't even
been conceived yet and you know this
crib isn't going to be used except for
this one baby that's is maybe a rather
contrived example but you can imagine
that kind of example what if you do
something it's going to harm a person it
doesn't matter whether the person's uh
been born yet if if you reasonably or
reasonably believe or should believe
that the person that there will be a
person who is harmed by that and who
doesn't want to be
uh because the harm is always about
whether they want it or not
um then it's immoral to do that that
harm and then a you you run into the
problem different people want different
things
so and that's why I said it's not it's
not that there isn't a more answer to be
to be found for this question that is
purely within morality it so with the
deafness
it depends what this child would want
now not even when he when the child is a
baby
it's when the child
expresses an opinion
so
um
suppose that this was a common practice
and suppose that that uh uh it always
happened let's take a simple case it
always happened that when children of
this kind grow up
they deeply resent it um
I suppose all of them do suppose 99 of
them do they they deeply resent it then
I think it wouldn't make sense to say
that they couldn't sue their parents for
having done this to them just as if they
had done it on the on the previous day
it it makes no difference if the parents
are in this situation where most people
deeply resent the this having been not
in them
um the the parents should reasonably
expect this to happen and therefore they
shouldn't do something that they
reasonably expect the person won't
consent to similarly
if
only one percent of the people who this
is done to resent it then it's very hard
to say that this should be wrong unless
something else has been done to that
person that deprives them of something
else not just hearing but reason the
ability to choose
so uh and that is again a matter of fact
whether they have been not always easy
to detect from the outside if if you
look at if the social worker comes
around and and is asked the question are
these parents brainwashing the child to
say later that the the the the the the
that he can sense
um are they brainwashing him or are they
merely bringing him up in in their
culture and if they're bringing him up
in their culture is it an evil culture
right or or is it a reasonable culture
even though it dis now because morality
is objective
all these questions have answers and
because
facts are objective all the factual
issues also have answers
they may not be easy to find
but uh
they have answers by the way when I said
until the child has grown up I don't
mean that
younger children don't have rights that
they do have rights the the the issue is
what they want not what they have the
maturity to know or whatever right so
you know just to go even deeper under it
when you brought up reasoning I think
that's probably where there's like a big
nugget here reason yes reason yes that's
probably like access to reason yes maybe
the most fundamental
uh person right yes of the universe and
and
I mean is that like a fair statement to
to assess I I guess I'm trying to get a
it's so much of your if I'm extracting
it it seems in your work you you rest
sort of the The Jewel of the Universe on
systems of error detection and
correction yes which I guess is an
approximation of something like reason
yes reason is is the ultimate in that
yes
how does one detect an error in Morality
and you're saying the answers may not
necessarily be in Morality itself what
if what if we did stumble upon an island
where they did this to every child yes
and that and this culture was I don't
know producing beautiful progress in all
of these other fields would that somehow
answer the question that this must then
be a moral practice to to make all the
children deaf well yes it would provided
that the uh culture there was not
keeping the knowledge of hearing
uh from from their members if they were
a thriving culture in other ways and
were open to the knowledge of other
cultures then it's hard to see how that
would be immoral after all
there are many decisions that parents
make have permanent effects or
long-lasting effects on their children
if you if you decide to bring up your
child in Albania with Albania as the
child's mother tongue then the child
will be will have to learn another
language before they have access to most
of the world's culture in fact to be
exact English
now it is not reasonable to conclude
that bringing up a child not speaking
English is immoral
however
bring up a child unable to learn English
for some reason certainly is immoral
because this word deny them again this
is this inability would be some some
irrational thing installed in the in
their thinking right and this again to
sort of use your language would be if
you're cutting off
uh potential access to streams of
knowledge or treasure chests of
knowledge you're just as parents or as a
society you're cutting it off you're
making it just forbidden is this
I think it's it's more uh access to
criticism there's an infinite amount of
knowledge so we always whatever we do
where we only have access to a to a
infinitesimal portion of it but if if
you're deprived of the means of
criticism then that is
the irrational thing and therefore the
immoral thing and so if you were to
bring back one of your your earlier
thought experiences if you were just in
a sensory deprivation tank forever and
you had an idea or a conjecture just in
the the magic of your own mind that
could be criticized or refuted or
confirmed by the evidence of hearing
something but you were unable to to hear
anything in there yes this is an immoral
situation from some or or maybe in your
view evil I'm gonna I was sort of saving
that word but in your your Definition of
optimism this is an evil from the view
from nowhere yes I think I I would need
a bit more knowledge about how I got in
this tank
but if it was your parents I mean let's
say as Andre and Leslie are saying in
their argument of like we we love our
Deaf culture and we want our child to be
in that so are they are they depriving
me of the knowledge that there is an
outside
or similarly are have they imbued me
with an ideology
um that that makes me irrationally
unable to consent to contact with the
outside then in either of those cases
they're doing something immoral right
and it's hard to imagine that that
somebody who is literally growing up in
a sensory deprivation tank could thrive
in the way that you imagine those people
on the island could Thrive because uh
they wouldn't have access to empirical
evidence and they wouldn't have access
to for example language
uh some people say that that you're not
fully human unless you have some
language
uh I think that can't be quite right
because children learning language are
evidently doing something highly
creative uh probably one of the most
creative things that people ever do is
learning their first language so they
must have been I think I mean we don't
have a theory of creativity but I
suppose that children must be
fully people long before they actually
have language so that that theory about
language can't be literally right but it
might be that being deprived of language
eventually deprives you of of all means
of of being
um
uh productive being being happy
well he said irrational and therefore
immoral that I thought that was
interesting because you know it's not
an association that I have in my brain
yeah straightforwardly at least
yeah let me try to I'll tell you a story
from his book The other thing about
David Deutsch is that he's he's actually
an incredibly beautiful writer like he
might sound overly
academic or sort of pedantic in some
ways in in these interviews and his
writing is actually like gorgeous like
brings me to tears at certain points and
and a storied it from his book about
irrational versus rational memes he he's
we'll skip this over for now but he he
takes goes from the gene to the meme and
he has these things called irrational
memes versus rational memes and he sort
of splits societies into static
societies versus open societies this is
where he's getting this idea and that
conversation where he would say in a
static Society probably is immoral
Society this is a utopian society it's a
society that feels like it has certainty
it stops a culture of criticism it has
an adopted phalabism where it thinks it
might always be wrong
um and he talks about Easter Island
and he he Compares uh a David
Attenborough going to Easter Island and
Jacob brunowski going to Easter Island
who was sort of a precursor to David
Attenborough as a naturalist and they
describe it in in almost opposite ways
where
Easter Island we all know it from the
big heads right and I don't know oh it's
one of the really big heads the Big
Stone heads you know you do not know the
Big Stone heads in Easter Island no this
is worse than the Harry Potter thing
yeah you must know this hold on it's
like that look I just Googled Easter
Island those things
nothing nothing
searching my memory oh my god well
Easter Island is Fame it's like in the
middle of sort of nowhere it's a very
very isolated island and it's famous
really only for this for having these
giant who who built those well this is
the thing so a tribe that was there and
I don't know all the history of it
um that no longer exists and so we come
across the civilization with these huge
heads and everyone has these theories
for it and um
it was we we finally for a long time it
was a mystery of how these heads even
got to the place they're all like sort
of I think they're on the coast looking
out and we assume this is like a
religious tradition a lot of
anthropologists have sort of tried to
get into it and they needed to to use
timber and wood to get uh the heads sort
of roll them to where they were going to
need to go they actually have bodies too
which go deep into the ground which is
weird that was like recently discovered
it's awesome but so Jacob brunowski goes
there in the ascent of man which was a
which is a really cool documentary
series very like Cosmos and precursor to
all the awesome Nature Documentaries
happening now and um
describes it as sort of the evidence of
a static society which die we think died
of like rapid geological change their
environment changed very quickly from
different forces and they died off and
apparently while they're dying off
they're like cutting down trees which
apparently they also needed to to live
cutting down trees and and putting these
heads up and repeating the same thing
over and over and then they die
rather than so it's almost a caution he
he describes it as a cautionary tale of
a society which stopped trying to find
new knowledge and new answers and was
and clearly had had the wrong answer
um versus a society an open society that
would would be continually trying to
discover new knowledge of how to solve
the problem
so David Attenborough goes there and has
sort of a
romanticizing of their culture and as
sort of a victim of global climate
change and a cautionary tale of what
what might happen to us and so the
lesson seems to be that he's delivering
is almost totally opposite of Jacob
which like bronowski is telling you like
this is a culture he literally calls it
like these heads as like the film strips
winding down of the same thing over and
over again of a society that has has hit
a static society and is suicidal versus
a society that would continue like us we
would not do this we hopefully we would
continue to try to find new knowledge to
solve the problem and hopefully acquire
it and they almost had sort of the exact
opposite
um
description or or prescription of of the
lessons from Easter Island uh that's in
a chapter at the end of his book called
unsustainable and it has it's a
surprising punchline of the book where
it gets to almost the the view of
um
sustainability there's a there's a
there's a conception of the idea of
sustainability it works very well in the
environmental realm of this perfect
balance where we sort of get all the
resources that we should be getting out
of the earth and sort of stay there like
level sort of forever like we're in some
perfect balance with this ecosystem that
apparently has given us just enough and
we sort of stay there and if we take too
much we'll break the life support system
of course it's totally wrong and then
it's also just suicidal because we would
just literally be sitting there forever
not creating new knowledge waiting for
the next asteroid to come and wipe us
out or the next epidemic that we don't
know how to solve or whatever it is and
he counters it with almost the exact
opposite Definition of sustainability
which is sustainable growth which he
calls infinite growth so it's almost
like the sustainability means growing
forever that's sustainable or is
sustainable sort of reaching some
balance and never growing ever so the
Easter Island and story in his view is a
is a the wrong description of
sustainability they'd reached some sort
of sustainability level plateau and sort
of a Utopia and diet because their
environment changed because we do not
live in a life support system the Earth
is constantly trying to kill us so
I don't know I don't know if that
explains any of his uh irrational versus
rational
and then he plugs in the word maybe he
uses that uses it as a synonym there for
for moral that the open societies are
moral versus the static societies which
are not hmm
I buy that
so I mean I think bringing it back to
the Dilemma
you know I think his analogy to learning
English was a good one
like you know there's nothing immoral
about bringing up your kid in Albania by
choice but there is something immoral
about
pushing the button that prevents them
from ever learning English right or a
Chinese or another language that would
open up much of the world's
you know knowledge to him that's about
the only line that he'll draw for
Morality which I think is safe
is this modes of of unplugging the
ability yeah he he calls Albanian a
disability later which is so if we have
any Albanian listeners who've lost them
yeah sorry whoops yeah
um
I mean I I don't think you even need
that analogy though to see
the argument for
making your child deaf being wrong I
mean you could just observe the fact
that
I don't know anyone born
with all five senses working who chooses
to
voluntarily make themselves deaf right
or walks around with noise canceling
headphones on 24 hours a day
or you know gets
like their
I don't even know what part of the ear
it would be yeah cochlear or something
whatever like just gets the part of
their ears that hear removed voluntarily
I've never heard it happen once right on
the other hand
you know I've I've seen people who are
deaf or partly deaf
go to Great length to restore any amount
of hearing yeah the the arrow of
you know attempting to make oneself not
deaf it only goes in that direction it
doesn't go in the opposite which
suggests that
there's something desirable from the
point of view of human nature about
having that sense yeah
um
and that's probably enough to get you to
the place
where you know this should not be this
is an immoral act
um
and no doubt from the parents point of
view
I mean there's also the fact that if you
can't hear you can still learn many
aspects of Deaf culture sorry if you can
hear
you can still learn
um
sign language
you can still learn to read lips and
whatnot
but you'll also have access to the rest
of the world and when your parents die
which will presumably happen you know
towards the middle of your life
you will still be able to have access to
the rest of the world
and you know if you're deaf then
once your parents die the whole
rationale for them having made you deaf
basically disappears yeah which is like
their connection with you and being
all being deaf now they're gone and
you're just deaf and alone in the world
yeah not literally but you know I try to
push even a little bit in the next
section about sort of the rights of the
parents over the child I can't get him
to budge almost like at all on that I
think he's pretty like stringent about
the the autonomy of choice of the
individual even to the point of parents
and the choices they make for their kids
um yeah and you heard he always just
grounds it all as far as he can and just
access to criticism which is a again
another one of those like simple ideas
but is almost if you think about hard
rather profound where
in his mind the sort of
moral mortal sin of the universe would
be you you come up with a theory you
conjecture an idea for a problem that
you've encountered in the world and you
are unable to you you are you are cut
off from the access to criticism of it
which is actually sort of amazing it's
like it's it's like again sort of a
beautiful again picture at the beginning
of infinity idea you are you have an
idea and you're in that hotel and you
walk out and you you're at the end
there's no there's no one who can
improve it and because you're cut off
from it it's almost like you cannot
escape the hotel you don't know what
room you're in that's sort of the the
Trap that he's trying to avoid he
doesn't quite find it even though again
we all find this for a repulsive moral
idea he he doesn't as long as those
conditions are met
he doesn't even really kind of want to
use the word
um immoral and this idea I brought up of
imagining an island or a society where
there's like all kinds of other progress
happening and they're doing this to
every kid he latches on to because he
doubts that it can exist but if it did
it kind of would win the argument
because he's he's uh again
guessing and noticing the links between
moral progress and all kinds of other
progress that if all the other things
were progressing in the aesthetic
progress and scientific progress and all
kinds of explanations and they were
intentionally making themselves deaf he
he would be forced to kind of carry that
link with him but maybe that is also
immoral version of progress
um and so yeah he doubts it can exist
and as you pointed out it almost
certainly isn't the case but if those
conditions were met he would he would
revise so it is it is a bit of a you
know he sticks to his first principle of
openness to criticism and fallibalism as
long as you have that then
what's also obvious here in a Thing
Called call it out is um
totalitarian religious regimes are
static societies because they cut off
criticism
um I would call any actually conception
of a moral God a totalitarian philosophy
because it cuts off criticism if you
know the mind of God if you think you
found the answer this is no longer a
beginning of infinity you are you are
you are cut off so it is a static
philosophy and I think a a irrational
one and suicidal one uh but maybe that's
a bit of a different conversation but
it's all it's all related I don't know
also you should know Easter Island
I'm actually I'm like flabbergasted but
you don't there was there was a cartoon
called the critic before your time as
well uh John Levitz played the voice of
the critic okay you don't know any of
these references this entire show has
been like us missing each other's
references of Pop Culture generational
tension yeah
anyway there was a kid with an Easter
Island head in that cartoon and it was
very funny if anyone knows the critic or
remembers the critic go look it up on
YouTube probably all the jokes are like
totally not PC now so
anyway I'll continue it is there an
argument to be made that depriving
someone or a person of a sense that is
likely to confuse them is can actually
help them in a way I mean I'm trying to
give the parents of this I also find
what they're trying to do rather
revolting but I have trouble actually
coming up with a go hear an argument
against it if their argument is is
saying like you know hearing will only
bring you Trouble In This World by not
hearing you actually are you know
welcomed into this magical Community
where the qualia of not hearing and just
speaking inside or communicating in Sign
Language
um is somehow
better than that so you can have the
knowledge that other people out there
might hear but
um
it will only bring you bring you harm by
doing it is there any like rational
argument for cutting off some sources of
Senses well as soon as you say you as
soon as you express this in the form of
cutting off
um
that implies that there's some obstacle
being put there rather than
the ascent to the truth of the
proposition I mean if it's true if it's
true that the the deaf people culture is
superior then why should one have to cut
anything off
Suppose there were a reversible way of
doing this
um I understand it in in in real life
uh it many forms of deafness are
reversible and some parents object to
using those
so that that's a kind of Converse of the
question you asked
um and there again uh
there's a difference between
not availing yourself of a possibility
which is what all of us do all the time
and being prevented from doing so now if
you're prevented from doing so and the
argument is well that person would
wouldn't have availed themselves of it
anyway you that's a matter of fact
whether they would or not again might be
hard to ascertain
that fact so uh you'd use tangential
evidence is it fair to I'm trying to
summarize this in in unfair sentences I
guess but is it fair to say something
like there is a
um mandatory
right to make mistakes
uh well that's certainly true I mean
it's impossible not to make mistakes but
right but uh it shall we say it is uh
forcibly preventing someone from making
a mistake is the wrong right right which
sounds almost counterintuitive like
especially as parents if you have a
child who you know is making a mistake
let's say Andre and Leslie are right in
some in some way and
um but preventing their child from
coming to the truth that being deaf is
somehow better than hearing
uh is is this this
so yes so turn it round even if they're
right it's still wrong for them to do it
against the child's will
right
um I mean you know I I think a lot of
things that are conventionally done in
our society like making children go to
school are wrong for exactly this reason
um
can you say more about that one I mean
people might like the alarm Bells I mean
there's something amazing about that
sentence that even if they're right
they're wrong and if we could well this
this is the the the Paradox of democracy
uh the Paradox of Liberty yeah uh we we
came to understand really really late in
the history of the human species after
several hundred thousand years of
getting it wrong that that there is no
Authority in regard to truth if you're
going to impose
a Prohibition on making mistakes you
need an authority for what is is or
isn't a mistake
and there is no such thing all systems
that uh that uh purport to have
authority the the purport to have
authority in regard to ideas
also need to be authoritarian in regard
in politically socially and and so on
and therefore that idea
is inherently tyrannical and in fact
all tyrannies arise that way so it's not
just a small thing or a marginal issue
this is this is what
reason and progress are all about
so the parents in this case are
the little mini tyrants in their own in
their own way as as Thomas says says
it is a tyranny but like all tyrannies
it satisfies a genuine human need and I
I would add
perversely
uh so people these if I say that these
uh deaf parents are doing wrong in a
particular case
I don't mean to contradict the idea that
they are well-meaning that they think
they're doing good
but because that morality is objective
it's a matter of moral fact whether they
are actually doing good or not and one
can argue about this and apply criticism
and and to bring that again like in your
how are you measuring again that
objective good is is it I guess we've
been dancing around that have like
access to
um
so destroying the means of correcting
errors right I Mondays Wednesdays and
Fridays I I think that that is the only
moral law
then then the rest of the time I I think
that that's foundationalism that that's
that's trying to set up a foundation for
Morality which which can't exist either
there are there are only ways of
criticizing existing moral theories but
certainly it it is a very big deal to
destroy the means of correcting errors
right and so I was I was actually
looking for this this morning in your
book and couldn't find the passage and
was actually annoying me so I'll cut
this part out but if I'm remembering
correctly somewhere in the beginning of
infinity you
in one of your very many deep Dives sort
of at the trying to get to the
foundation of of moral truths of the
universe it was something like
um
so I've I've always tried to bridge the
izot problem and we'll try to do it here
I've always tried to do it even I know
logically it's impossible but in order
to do anything I think we have to try to
start building a bridge I've always been
attracted to the way to do it using Carl
Sagan my my one of my favorite thinkers
and his one of his famous observations
of we are away for the universe to know
itself which was one of these poetic
Expressions which when you really think
about it deeply is actually just a
lovely scientific observation there's no
there's no more poetry in there it just
is actually a pure sort of scientific
observation you seemed in your book to
get somewhere
um close to it if I if I remember
correctly
where I use that sort of Carl Sagan is
ought bridge if you build the isot
bridge with that sentence there's
nothing in it that says well we ought to
then the universe ought to know itself
but it seems to me that there's no other
bridge to build because there's nothing
else to do but for the universe to know
itself oh uh I think one can one can
make a stronger Bridge than that do it
helped me yeah so the the traditional
um alt is distinction
uh as raised by Hume but also as kind of
taken for granted by philosophers for
for Millennia
um is all justification is it's all
about you can't derive
an ought from an is which which is
itself rests on a sort of empiricist
Dogma that that nothing is worthwhile
unless it can be built on
experiment or science or whatever but
we're not in the business of deriving
knowledge we can't derive any knowledge
from anything that's not what knowledge
is it's conjectural and it tries to
solve problems
so and what's more it's explanatory
so whereas
um
uh you can't deduce or derive
an ought from an is
there are many explanatory connections
between ought and is so you will find as
I as I uh I think I said in in my Edge
article on on 9 11 that that
um if somebody is deeply in
immersed in an immoral ideology
they will be mistaken about certain
facts as well inextricably right and
vice versa
and how come if if you can't get an
ought from an is how how come you can be
sure that a person who believes a
certain evil ideology will also believe
a certain conspiracy theory about the
facts
um it's because of explanation although
it is logically possible to believe any
kind of uh ideology independently of the
facts what human minds want to explain
why and if they try to explain why it is
Justified to kill so and so they need to
have a factual theory about how
so-and-so differs from the person they
do not want to kill
and so uh in in explanatory sense
um odds and Isis are intimately linked
and and you can't have one without the
other
can you derive is this from arts or
they're just Linked In A mysterious way
or can we say more
as I said you can't derive anything from
anything but but it certainly uh oughts
lead to conjectures right and and
conjectures can be true or false foreign
there's so many different ways to
approach that so many different lenses
through which you can look at that
problem where it seems like a genuine
problem or a false problem yeah yeah I
would like to hear him talk to you know
Sean Carroll or someone who really
thinks that other distinction just to
see both physicists yeah like are they
just going to talk past each other or
you know or Sam Harris or Dan Dennett or
something I feel like you can derive
anything from anything it's such a
that's like a knock down like way to
like what right but you know the
response to that would be yeah sure you
can because
um yeah I'm also skeptical of the art is
argument that you can't derive one from
the other but what what
someone like Sean Carroll is going to
say or anyone who believes
and say oh yeah you can devise you can
derive is is from other is is is
statements right like some is statements
imply
others just logically and the whole
point of the argument is that
in as a matter of strict Logic the ought
can't
just be derived from from the is so I I
want to hear him
I'm sure I'm sure he has an account
argument to that but yeah what does he
mean when he said you can't drive
anything from anything I think you know
what he means by that I think I do so I
think you know he goes back uh Jay here
I told you I was terrified of this
episode because I was tasked with the
responsibility of interpreting David
Deutsch for Coleman and you here's a
point where I sent I sent the rough cut
of this episode to David and he listened
to it and helped me understand a few
things that he was trying to say a
little better this particular line of
you can't drive anything from anything
that Coleman just asked me to explain he
helped me sort of understand a little
bit better of what he meant there which
what he really meant I'll play you what
I actually responded to with Coleman
which was very close but what he really
meant and was careful about here is that
um there's no Foundation to knowledge
there's no ultimate foundation for it
because of course you can derive certain
things from certain kinds of conjecture
and kinds of knowledge the example he
gave to me in an email while we were
discussing this was
you can derive predictions from
conjectures or the explanations proposed
explanations for problems that you
encounter in the world such as the
seasons ones that we that we we've
brought up a few times in the episode if
your conjecture is that uh the
explanation of why the seasons are
changing is that you live on a round
object that has an axial tilt and it and
in certain times of the year it tilts
towards the heat source and other times
away whatever your conjecture is there
you can derive a prediction from that
conjecture which of course would be a
prediction of something like that the
seasons are out of phase on different
parts of the earth and out of sync at
the the
a specific time which of course turned
out to be confirmed so you can derive
certain things from certain things but
his point there is really that there is
no ultimate foundation for those
knowledge for that knowledge
um it's just you can derive predictions
and then and then call something a good
explanation versus a bad explanation but
it's he doesn't he he was trying to push
back on me suggesting that his view was
somehow a foundationalist point of view
so there you go that's me uh trying to
explain it better to you here now and
now I'll go back into how I answered it
to Coleman which was also quite true and
and pushed more on David's
um literal interpretation of
philosophical standpoints and Frameworks
like empiricism and the mistakes that
are are made by thinking that you are
deriving things directly from the thing
itself
so you'll hear that I use dinosaur modes
which actually you're going to hear I
call fossils dinosaur bones they're not
even dinosaur bones but David Deutsch
also pointed out to me in an email in
fact they're just rocks that were around
dinosaur bones that made the impressions
of them so anyway keep that in mind as I
answer this to Coleman uh side note I'm
also recording this little edit section
that I'm pasting in while I'm sitting at
a cafe in Peru which is lovely anyway
enjoy enjoy the rest of the episode I
think I do so I think you know he goes
back to this and pierced as a mistake
all the time and justificationism which
is which is a similar kind of thing he
tries to as he calls himself out about
foundationalism he's trying to say there
is no foundation on that on that respect
I think he and Sean would agree like
there is there is he pulls in um uh the
famous cave analogy of Shadows on a cave
so like empiricism again so empiricism
is this idea of that the only knowledge
that you could possibly have you we get
through our senses this is sort of a
Descartes idea and it's wrong at the
time it seemed kind of right you take
your senses for granted that you're you
are engaged and experiencing the world
but as he points out very very early on
like that's not even true you're just
getting crackles in the nerves somewhere
and those are representations of the
real world but this doesn't mean you
there is no knowledge so uh for example
sometimes he talks about like dinosaur
bones
empiricists the creationists always
point out of course like you you've
never empirically witnessed or
experienced a dinosaur you only see its
bones so you can only talk about the
dinosaur bones and a a strict empiricist
would say that right you only know about
dinosaur bones you don't know about
dinosaurs but
the power of knowledge and explanation
but you're not deriving from the bones
itself is you need to explain these
bones that are in some certain level of
strata of the ground or whatever it is
and you need an explanation for how they
got there and what they are and that
that's what the power of knowledge and
explanation is which is not false
those are real things even though you've
never directly experienced a dinosaur
um another example so like the the the
the cave on the wall analogy which I
guess is one of those philosophical
nuggets we really haven't even talked a
lot about but it's like you're looking
at the shadows of on a on a cave wall uh
I think was this Plato or Socrates I
don't know Plato and
so you never actually directly see the
people but you see their Shadows on this
cave wall you're just staring at the
cave all the whole time in the slave and
then you are guessing that there is a
person who's casting the Shadow or you
have you need to explain the Shadow and
then a light source somewhere behind it
you never directly access this person
but you could predict every time the
shadow appears in a certain way then
food appears so this person might be
bringing food you've never directly
accessed the person or the light source
and that is our condition that's the
condition of our minds which are trapped
in Block black boxes called our skulls
which never directly access the universe
that we're in but we get evidence of it
so this I know that sounds almost like I
mean he's a philosopher so he's a
stickler empiricism just can't be true
because we don't directly access
actually anything it's all just there's
a layer between us and everything we
experience well the experience itself is
the layer us and what's really out there
and just throw one more beautiful thing
he writes about that to picture it even
more profoundly is he tells this story I
think when he was in college if working
with the um a bunch of astronomers who
were studying distant galaxies and at
the time the way that they were studying
them it's probably similar now
is they would take photographs from
telescopes and print them out on like
glass slides and then look at the glass
slides through a microscope in order to
locate galaxies and do measurements or
whatever and so just like pause and
picture that so he he writes about how
he's looking through looking down you're
like literally thinking about things
billions of light years away in a in a
different direction from the earth and
you're looking down through this metal
thing that we've created with like
warped glass that we have the knowledge
of how to do and somehow in this other
little glass with those little specks
but in your mind you're seeing because
of knowledge only because of the
knowledge of it you're seeing
distances that are immense and powers
that are huge and stars exploding only
because of the knowledge and he tells
this incredibly funny story to like hit
it home where he was helping these
people sort of identify
um the galaxies in in these slides and
he saw something kind of weird in one of
them and he asked like oh what's this
one and then one of the other like
experts looked through and he's like oh
that's just a speck of dust on the on
the glass slide and the Monumental shift
in his mind of scope and scale from a
from galaxies billions of light years
away or whatever it is to a speck of
dust on a piece of glass underneath it
was huge
um but the only difference there again
is the knowledge so he calls that closer
to reality you're actually we're getting
between you your mind and that distant
Quasar that you're studying the way to
get closer to it is to put things in
between you and it that are our
knowledge in that case a telescope and a
microscope and a glass slide and all of
these things that are are actually
physically between you and that thing
now but got you closer to it somehow
which is beautiful and sort of blows up
the empiricism argument as it were that
our knowledge is the thing that comes
between us and the world so we have to
create more of it yeah I don't know I
still don't know how this relates to
morality actually that's the problem
well I think yeah I mean the move the
move he's making is I think a good one
which is
people take the distance between our our
beliefs about morality and the ideal of
certainty yeah and they say look how far
we are from certainty about this
therefore
there are no objective moral truths
right and he's pointing out that
certainty is never on the table even
in domains
where it's you know everyone accepts
that there are facts no one wants to say
climate change being real is
a subjective fact right
or even more basic stuff like you know
just the laws of physics
the least controversial laws of physics
he's saying even there from the
empiricist perspective
that's not certain
and he's right
and I think I think he's right to draw
that analogy the only difference between
you know phys I mean the classic example
from David Hume of the empiricist thing
is like yeah you've seen the sun rise
every day of your life
and you quote know that it's going to
rise tomorrow but on the basis of what
yeah and even that even even that is
incomplete because the theory of
sunrises
it needs an explanation and if you
explain it that it's risen every day and
then it's going to rise tomorrow that's
actually not a full explanation because
what if you're on the International
Space Station what if you're on the sign
what if you're in Mars that's actually
an incomplete explanation
um it's a pretty good one that will
continue to succeed but once there's a
problem with it yeah you need a new
explanation for it and so the theory of
the theory of sunrises is is actually
you know also might be wrong even though
it's happened every day this is a it's
almost there there's a lot of I mean you
talk a lot about progress and and uh and
looking at graphs and one of the really
annoying things and habits that we have
as humanity is like the straight line
bias of you look at a graph and you
continue and you just sort of extend it
infinitely as if nothing will change and
the major problem with that is that
future casting graphs it's impossible
impossible sometimes maybe probable to a
degree but impossible to predict future
knowledge creation and
that's because we don't have a theory
for it and it's sort of mysterious where
it comes from that will drastically
change the graph and and once you have
the right explanation for it a complete
explanation for it you have knowledge
that will drastically change the graph
imagine going back like
three like even five thousand years and
looking at the graph of population what
would it explain the huge difference
like if you just extended that line
you'd be way wrong yeah so what changed
and it was knowledge creation a lot of
different kinds of knowledge being
created actually as it were
um so we don't the future is
unpredictable in a lot of those ways
um and the problems that it that it
produces are also unpredictable one more
thing is to throw into this again I
don't even know particularly how it
relates to the Dilemma or even morality
but he also writes about the reach of
explanations and when he talks about
humans being Universal explainers and CR
and some some
conjectures that we have in theories
that we have have Universal reach and we
talked about the seasons earlier the
seasons is a good one because if you
could locally be trying to solve the
problem of why seasons are happening and
conjecture this thing about a
heliocentric universe and around earth
and an axial tilt
which makes predictions in that one in
particular predicts that the seasons
will be out of phase so you may have
never even seen or know for certain
empirically that there's another side of
the Earth with land on it but you're
predicting that if there is and you go
there it will be winter when it's summer
here when we're in the north part of it
that's testable it turned out to be true
a good explanation but that also think
about the reach of that explanation
actually then informs the entire
universe you're talking about seasons
and different planets you've never even
been to shapes of universities because
the explanation also would apply to any
spherical object rotating around any
Star yeah like it needs a lot of other
things to be true and makes predictions
about them one of the other examples I
think he even writes about is like the
amazing thing about Darwin and his
theory
was that he had never seen a gene he had
never empirically experienced a gene he
didn't know they existed but his theory
demanded and predicted that something
like a gene must exist yeah and then we
found it yeah which is kind of amazing
that the explanation that explains the
problem in the world makes predictions
and then you look for them that's sort
of how science works that's what he
calls evidence then if you find them
it's it confirms it or denies it we know
there was problems with his theory and
it's still being being predicted
Einstein's theory of gravity it's so
it's like the conjecture part of it is
pure creativity and then and then as
he's saying the more the moral sin would
be to deny access to criticism or to
create a society that prevents criticism
to then decipher and decide which
explanations are good and which
explanations are bad
and that's
I think where he grounds his morality
whether it's foundationalism or not
trying to map it onto just this one
child hearing something I think is
interesting again we're like sort of off
off that tangent but that's David
Deutsch
so in some ways the auths are all we
actually have then and we just check it
we can be mistaken about the odds as as
again the very fact that it's objective
the fact that morality is objective
implies in in my way of looking at
things that we can be mistaken about it
it also implies that by conjecture
criticism and so on we are capable of
correcting the errors though there's
never any guarantee of that and we never
know whether we've corrected an error or
have made things worse again
uh if a problem arises we can make a
conjecture about what we've done wrong
that's all we can and and how we might
fix it that's all we can do we we never
have firm ground to rest on like it it
in politics
if you
have a bad policy that may cause harm
people may die uh and so on but but so
long as the harm it does isn't of the
form removing one's ability to change
policies then it's not as bad as it
could be and on the other hand if it
does have that property then it's worse
than anything that the actual policy
could do we never have
institutions that do this perfectly the
the error correction so we always are
should be looking for better more
efficient ways of uh correcting errors
uh but they are more important than than
getting it right in the first place
so I'm thinking of um like the anti-vaxx
movement which has some direct analogies
to the the case we're talking about here
of a parent saying like oh you know so
I mean I guess I'm curious It's the way
your mind works of I feel like that's a
a mistake and usually as you said the
people who are anti-vaxxers are clearly
making mistakes about the isses as well
they usually are ripe with conspiracy
theories yes
um
how would you lay out the argument that
an anti-vax
parent is is uh how would you even
phrase it committing them uh is it an
immoral act or is this is a moral
generally yeah it would be an immoral
act but the the actual case with
vaccines is is more complicated because
in some cases the
um
benefit of the vaccine
is more for other people than for that
child
uh so then there's a question of uh are
the do the needs of the many outweigh
the needs of the few well not if it
involves violating someone's rights
so uh it depends on the facts of the of
the of the vaccine thing now if if the
if the factual issue is that it is that
there is simply a
an ideology which believes a conspiracy
theory which is false
um then that is one kind of issue then
obviously it's a moral wrong whether
that should be illegal is a separate
question because you can't necessarily
distinguish that case in a court of law
from someone who reasonably believes
something that the scientific consensus
doesn't believe and there would be no
scientific progress if you made such
ideas illegal or if you made acting on
them illegal uh the the uh the first
person to vaccinate children was facing
a a a uh religious consensus or whatever
that that that said that it was actually
harming them
um and
even in modern times
um some of the vaccines did have serious
side effects on some of the children now
uh
if
a vaccine
um saves
a million children
but cripples 10 000 children
um
and those 10 000 didn't want to be
vaccinated
I think you've done it wrong
uh now again even that is a highly
idealized case right but you've also
done it right in some sense as well no
no no uh I mean you you've helped some
people but that is not necessarily you
know if you're Robin Hood and steal
things and then given to give them to
worthy people yeah you've helped people
but you've done something immoral I
guess this brings up are you are you
taken in by any of the let's say
traditional or codified moral Frameworks
like utilitarianism or consequentialism
do any of these sort of start to get it
I I think that all those
so they're all wrong because they they
are foundationalism they're all trying
to set up a thing from which you can
deduce all morality perhaps only in
principle though it's too hard to do the
calculation but they're wrong because
there there is no foundation for
knowledge
are they good approximations well some
of them are good approximations in some
situations but I think they're better
regarded not as approximate foundations
but as modes of criticism so for example
utilitarianism
um
I I think it's silly to say that the
foundation of morality is the greatest
good or the greatest number for a start
it's circular what is good what is that
what we what we think of is good for us
is partly dependent on what we think is
moral
so we have to we have to have an opinion
about what is moral before we can decide
what is good and so on but on the other
hand
if you uh propose to do something uh and
your friend says to you
in what way does this benefit you and
you can't think of anything
they have made a valid criticism that is
a problem that you should be you should
want to uh consider because it might be
that that idea that you should do the
thing has lodged in your mind and is is
affecting you to your detriment
and similarly with the with the social
case if if if if you're planning to do
something uh which is going to benefit
you but harm many other people then
um and if someone says to you uh is uh
do you really want to benefit at those
people's expense then that is the mode
of criticism the answer the right answer
might be yes but it needs an argument
it needs some something to solve that
prima facie problem
uh so and the same with uh deontology
which says that you sometimes you have a
duty to do things I think all these
things all these proposed foundations
work quite well
as modes of criticism but are terrible
as foundations right and so in
conjecturing towards again I'm thinking
of the is there an Ultimate sort of
purpose of the universe in this way that
that you're ultimately building towards
not in the utopian way I'm totally sold
on the beginning of infinity that there
will always be problems but but it's the
ability the ability to always attempt to
solve problems is the
is the ultimate goal is to solve a
problem so you can solve another one yes
it's it I think it's a bit weird to call
that a goal because because it's not
something that lies in the distant
future the problem is something we have
now
um and we will always have problems that
too can't be can't be sort of as a goal
because we're not ever going to reach
the end we're not going to reach the
beginning of the end where we're never
going to even scratch the surface so so
calling that a goal but it maybe is the
I'm almost thinking in like a Buddhist
way of like the path is the goal kind of
thing it's like you
the the goal is to always know that
you're never done well this I
would you be satisfied if I called that
The Human Condition yes or the the
healthy human condition or the proper
Human Condition I would be satisfied
with it and then I'm thinking is that I
mean I don't know if that argument wins
for the parents to try to I'm imagining
you as a therapist trying to talk them
out of this thing they want to do to
this this their unborn child
of in some ways are they denying The
Human Condition maybe this that's
complicating the matter too much with
the unborn child and the deafness but
yeah I'm satisfied with that as The
Human Condition and elevating that to
the status of
um
a moral good in and of itself is that
fair to do are you in and of itself uh I
mean I I I think I would have
if if I were in the rather unlikely
situation of trying to persuade parents
uh not to do a thing
um the I would
use that kind of consideration
but I think there are more
there are more pressing ways of
uh of coming from there for example uh I
I think probably the first thing I would
ask is what are you trying to do here
are you really trying to uh benefit the
child or are you trying to benefit you
or
even worse the culture that you think is
so valuable uh the culture doesn't have
any rights to do things to people a
culture is a is a thing that should
emerge from people choosing to adopt it
rather than some other culture and if if
the reason that your child is going to
be adopting this culture is that he
doesn't have the opposite choice
then you've you've got a case to answer
here how are you different from peop
from parents who do things to to their
children that you don't approve of
and I mean that is that another way of
saying you're denying the child the
human The Human Condition is to make
choices
uh yes it's it's it's it's to solve
problems to to make explanations the
only way to solve problems is is to have
well choices is one of the one of the
things that uh
is a consequence of
um solving problems because we choose
to drop one Theory and accept another if
we're physically prevented from dropping
a theory
then uh and that has been done
intentionally by somebody then they have
a case to answer
um
uh I'm I'm entirely happy with calling
that a case to answer I think like with
your island with your hypothetical
Island which I kind of doubt could exist
but suppose it could exist
uh then there would be an answer the the
answer would be look we're not going to
tear down all the beautiful things we do
here just because you don't like the way
we look or you know with the way our
inner ear looks uh that in that
situation there would be an answer but
that doesn't mean that the answer
applies in general to other situations
and that I think that the more realistic
case is that there aren't good reasons
there isn't a good answer to that
criticism
and is there I mean I guess we haven't
played with all the variables of
potential things that we do to children
um
in the case that has written you know
the the Parents try to put up an
argument of like well
people in poverty have children all the
time and this these are all kinds of
obstacles do these arguments are these
arguments unique to something as
seemingly profound as hearing or I mean
I guess you brought up a case of a kid
who who's born in in uh Albania and
learns Albanian and this is yeah so I
think disability in a way
well it obviously is right okay uh and I
think the the
bring up a child in poverty or in a war
zone or in a tiny community
is also a case to answer
uh I think in particular cases the the
there might be an answer
but it is prima facie it you know if if
other things being equal If the parents
could bring up the child in a way that
did not have those attributes then they
should do it and unless there's a a
reason to the contrary
um so but but I I as you say I I agree
with you that the
as a matter of degree the the deafness
disability is much greater than the
albanian-speaking disability yeah but
ultimately they're the same kind of
thing and as I said in an extreme
situation like your hypothetical Island
there would there could be a perfectly
good answer hmm for why they should
carry on doing it oh by the way
technology will eventually solve this
right uh eventually there will be no
such thing as irreversible hearing loss
yeah and can you talk a little bit more
about that as in uh I mean I'm always
and maybe it's why I'm so interested in
your books but fascinated in the
relationship between
let's call it traditional scientific
progress or technological progress and
moral progress I always think for
example of okay we there's a lot of
stories we can tell of why civilization
sort of dropped slavery and we could
tell it's sort of a nice moral story of
like oh we had just an epiphany one day
of how terrible this is and then we're
like oh we should all decide to stop
doing that and maybe that might be a
true story but there's also other
stories that you could say of well it
was really helpful that we had the
cotton gin and it was economical to not
use human labor anymore so the argument
became a lot more convincing to the
southern slave owners so there are a
number of true stories you can tell
about a gigantic phenomenon like like
the rejection of slavery by the by the
Western world you can also tell false
stories about it and I think the the
economically based stories are
fundamentally false
um the the uh this idea of uh King
Cotton and and that kind of thing and
the cotton gin that it's all not true
that that's not how it happened uh it it
couldn't have happened that way uh so
um but but I think it's not an accident
that scientific progress economic
progress and moral progress go together
right uh Jacob bronowsky makes some some
very powerful arguments along these
lines uh he says for example you cannot
really do science at all you can't make
progress in science unless you have
certain values like respect for truth
respect for freedom to express ideas uh
and more subtly certain properties of a
scientific Community are necessary for
scientific progress to continue beyond
one generation now in historically there
were many examples of India individual
scientists who made progress but they
were immersed in in an outside society
that that did not believe in progress
and therefore it didn't continue they
they couldn't set up the kind of
relationships with their students and
the kind of institutional framework that
would be needed for the
uh scientific values to continue and
therefore it was impossible for
scientific progress to continue so it's
not an accident that that those three
things and other things all went
together in the case of the uh European
Enlightenment and so it's a bit of a is
it a chicken egg question or there is a
a common link of this oh yes there is
language our language doesn't have a
single word for the thing that was
needed but I I've I've expressed it in
the form the Quest for good explanations
right
um
applies in Morality it applies in
science it implies in uh it applies in
engineering
um and it applies in politics with a
Vengeance right
um and all those things uh were really
part of the same impulse and it was that
impulse that caused both
the revulsion against slavery and the
the
technology that made slavery less
valuable by the way Thomas Seoul uh
points out that slavery was never
economically valuable yeah it it was
only valuable to a certain group of
people in society at the expense of the
other
non-slave owning people but if I throw a
story out of something like meat eating
if we decide it's it's used a lot but if
we you know went into the future
hundreds of years it's it's I think not
an unlikely story that they would be
like not eating animals anymore and look
back on horror at us in some ways would
the story of uh perhaps In Our Lifetime
lab grown meat becomes cheap and
economical and tasty and nutritious and
all that they'll suddenly be a lot more
uh the next day there will be a lot of
moral vegans out there suddenly being
like oh this is great I never wanted to
eat need in the first place is that is
that relationship am I making that up or
or do we are we already craving that
explanation now and we just don't have
the the technological yes well just as
there were people violently opposed to
slavery long before the technology was
and and even despite believing that
slavery was economically valuable
mistakenly
there were already people who were
violently opposed to slavery
and so there are people who are vegans
today even though there's no artificial
meat right now I don't happen to think
that eating meat is in any way wrong uh
however I'm sure that uh with the
development of technology and not very
far in the future uh we'll all be eating
artificial meat simply because as you
say it'll be cheaper tastier it'll be
better in every way than than using
animals and then although I don't think
it's immoral therefore I don't think
people will look back with moral
revulsion
they will look back with actual
revulsion because the uh the process of
creating meat is actually revolting
though in my opinion not at all immoral
then you're leaning on the the that
animals are not Universal explainers yes
that's right in that regards to that
line that's right so so when when where
if you kill an animal
um you're not extinguishing anything
because the other animals have
everything the other instances of that
species have all the things that that
animal did there's an issue of whether
the animals can suffer
um again we don't know we don't know how
Consciousness works we don't know how
creativity Works uh so we should perhaps
ER on the uh on the side of assuming
they can but but
like with the
um with the deafness case and and so on
it
it doesn't really entirely depend on
whether animals can suffer
it it depends on what people think
so uh the as long as most people think
that animals can suffer then we have to
frame our
laws and social institutions uh to ER on
the uh on on the side of caution in that
respect
um uh there was a time when people
didn't think slavery was immoral they
it's not that they thought that slaves
weren't human it's just that they
thought that slavery was a natural
condition of of some people just like
some people are young some people are
old some people are ill so some people
are slaves
um and so so for example
um they would have thought that
enslaving somebody
was highly immoral and unless there was
an excuse like they were bad or
something but but in in general
enslaving something is highly immoral
but actually how buying a Slave
uh was not a totally moral it's just uh
you know you're you're buying the person
who is a slave and that's his condition
just like it's not your fault any more
than the condition of someone being ill
is your fault or someone being short or
tall or whatever
now
part of the reason that that changed is
that philosophically
we came to understand that there is a
Unity among all people
which it isn't derived from a moral
commandment to deem all people equal
when they're obviously not equal but
there's an a factual a factual way in
which that we are all equal namely as I
would put it we are all capable of
creating new explanations and it's the
creating new explanations that makes it
immoral to keep a human slave but not
immoral to keep a dog as a pet so to
bring to finish this up by trying to to
pin it back a little bit because we've
wandered into a lot of different uh
areas but of the of the parents
and uh this this decision that they want
to make
I I guess the question is what is the
most you've said a few times you found
it you find it revolting and maybe in a
moral act but
um you're uncomfortable making it an
illegal act in some way or what's like
the most concrete thing that you can no
it's not that I I I I I think that
whether whether it is immoral depends on
the conditions in society like you you
mentioned some hypothetical conditions
under which it would not be immoral
um and if it's not immoral then it
shouldn't be illegal either for example
male circumcision
uh is kind of in this situation that the
vast majority of uh men who have been
circumcised as babies don't object and
think it's fine and and uh and so on but
if we got into the situation where a
high proportion of them
um uh eventually said that the uh that
this was a wrong done to them then ipso
facto it would be a wrong and so to
distinguish this I guess I'm getting
confused about the note of of moral
realism versus
cultural sort of norms so the morality
is about things like the conditions that
do or don't thwart the correction of
Errors the things that do or don't uh in
some approximation uh infringe human
rights and so on they're not about
things like inner ears
morality doesn't speak about inner ears
or foreskins or and so on it doesn't
have an opinion about that it's opinion
about that is via the opinions of people
who are able to make choices who who
haven't been deprived of the ability to
make choices as well
as their inner ear or whatever
I think that that probably puts the bow
on it and my my lack of my foreskin this
is not preventing me from trying to make
errors in here although I think I resent
it a little bit so
I mean there's so much in there I don't
I don't even know what to pick out you
know the slavery thing is uh is
interesting so he in the book he also
has sort of
um tries to pull the rug out from under
someone like Jared diamond and his gun
storms and steel analysis uh I think in
general he is pretty hostile to a
explanations of progress moral progress
or anything that downplay the notion of
ideas obviously it's all about knowledge
and knowledge creation and and and the
thesis sort of laid over the entire
uh history of of the Universe I think is
is really good and and he is resistant
to other thesises because he he sees
their their flaws something like
um
and actually another thing to point out
I didn't expect it in exactly these
terms but why why did why did we walk
away from slavery and he sort of Rejects
My economic story which may have been a
sort of like
um
Jared Diamond type story and he's like
no it was an idea story and it was a
knowledge story and maybe in particular
a Darwin knowledge story
where the the idea that it is just your
condition to be a slave and so this
isn't a moral wrong
uh was was wrong turned out to be a an
inadequate description of the universe
has almost shown and displayed by
something like Darwin being like no that
you know that that clashes that that's a
problem that idea existing along with
Evolution and us being an animal and
evolving is a problem because it's not a
Divine condition of that person to be a
slave it actually makes no sense where
absent of Darwinism or that explanation
of nature
um it would it may have made sense yeah
it would have been like the it would
would have been like you having a an
explanation of the Magician of just
saying like well it's just magic or it's
just this but yeah well with slavery
the truth is that
you know it's been practiced in almost
every society for the past ten thousand
years and it was only really in America
and the West
where slaveholders felt any burden to
come up with an argument in defense of
slavery and that's where white supremacy
came in or
you know is it most people who had
slaves throughout history
it was they they felt as much burden to
defend the practice of slavery as the
average meat eater right now feels to
defend the practice of eating meat it
would just never occur to you to come up
with an argument in defense of something
that's taken for granted right and um
I think he's right to
observe the importance of the War of
ideas in ending slavery
at the same time
I'm definitely open to arguments about
you know
economics being important too it's you
know you you not reduce it to one or the
other but I also agree with him I don't
buy the argument that it was just
in people's self-interest yeah it no
longer hold slaves and they all started
observing their self-interest right and
that's I don't think that's historical
with the economic Point like also it's
it's um like he would say yeah like it's
not it's not pick or choose any of them
it's that they're all linked by this
some this explanatory knowledge and and
that there is objective progress and so
of course all of these progress sort of
at the same time
um so yeah like I did sort of the
chicken and egg question doesn't I think
the very big picture there might be true
yeah probably is true at the same time
there are you know historical counter
examples
Nazi science actually you know big moral
step back but actually some scientific
steps forward China today
one of the worst human rights abusers on
the planet
one of the highest growth rates right
um lots of technological progress yeah
but I think you would argue that those
all all of those cultures well we'll see
about China but those cultures do
they're unsustainable they're
unsustainable right that could be
because of the staff could be true I
mean yeah
we'll see I think China is the probably
the biggest challenge to that yeah right
now even if in the grand scheme of
History it's an exception that proves
the rule it's such a populist exception
that I would wonder what he would
we'll see if it's sustainable yeah I
mean the argument that like they don't
innovate they just steal all the ideas
for now is is a is a pretty good one
that might go on for quite a while uh so
then you know it but if it took over the
whole world then it would become
unsustainable because it would it has
this culture of suppressing criticism
and so therefore we'll just be way
awaiting its suicide either from within
or without because of the errors that
it's making that everybody makes are
uncorrectable because they're
suppressing that correction
um so for now yeah the experiment could
run for quite a while of just stealing
people's Innovations
um which Yeah well yeah I don't even
know if that's a that's a fair thing to
say but one more thing on the slavery
thing and and Darwinism and maybe the
theory of of natural selection which
pulls the rug under the out from under
the explanation that this is just
people's condition in life is to be a
slave
um and there's something they're also
hearkening back to that notion of reach
of explanations where it is trying
Darwin trying to solve the problem of of
why there's different
differences in species species in the
Origin of Species and those problems he
never set out to solve the problem of
slavery when he did it but the reach of
his explanation actually did wash over
those Shores into moral problems like
slavery and pointed out problems of
slavery
um which I think is is fascinating so he
talks even about
um
something like the in one of these
wonderful talks he did about optimism he
talks about
in the in the the 50s am I getting this
right
well yeah in in the 40s and 50s the like
the esoteric properties of uranium of
some random thing on on the periodic
table like the entire civilization
hinged on knowledge of that thing which
at the time of studying it hundreds and
years before would have been totally
unknowable or even now the the
properties of CO2 are are a thing and
it's it's unknowable the knowledge and
the reach of the thing that you're
discovering of what it will affect or
change when you're discovering it it's a
really great
um uh it's a great
point to make in favor of pure knowledge
for the sake of knowledge and pure
scientific research in any field right
now the entire world could hinge on it
and kind of does hinge on it and
knowledge for the sake of knowledge and
finding knowledge for the sake of
knowledge again the reach of it you
might find something that has Universal
reach Darwin solving slave Avery in some
ways or or
delivering a better explanation of
humans
did a tremendous work tremendous amount
of work in something like slavery but he
didn't set out to solve the problem of
slavery but he may have and I that again
like the one-to-one ratio is is probably
unfair but he would say of course
they're all Linked In some explanatory
Grand principle way I don't know
if you look historically like the
the countries that have had the highest
rates of economic growth
have also had the highest rates of
scientific discovery have also
been the most popular destinations for
the migrants around the world which
might Point more to how the moral you
want to be treated well yeah right and
have also tended to not have
truly morally backwards cultures
or have have tended to be on the
Vanguard of
moral progress
you know but those are yeah those are
correlations and I I agree with him
they're not just accidents of History
yeah they're there's some explanation
you can find for why they're correlated
however imperfectly yeah and um you know
in certain cases you might find examples
like China that were the
the imperfectness of the correlation is
especially visible yeah
um let's just let's end it there and
let's end season one there
um it was 14 episodes yeah I had a
couple guests who who didn't it was
going to be 16. uh but we'll take a
break uh I don't know when we'll come
back sometime later in the year it's
gonna be an awful year I think 2020
politically so I'm I'm just gonna like
put on the headphones
um and yeah you have your if people want
more Coleman you're out there
conversations with Coleman is out there
I've been writing on what Jay thinks a
bunch of essays coming out and stuff so
you'll find us but I'm gonna go up there
and collect a bunch of dilemmas with
interviews with people again
for season two uh and we'll see I might
get back more to the roots that we
started with of like here's sort of just
like a trolley problem type thing and
let's solve it I'm also interested in in
taking on people in sort of the
political and religious Realms as well
not just philosophers and psychologists
so we'll see who I can I can throw
questions at
um and for anybody listening like this
is super fun and thank you we've
garnered a really nice audience that's
very participatory and and engages with
it if you have any dilemmas that you
want to throw uh I think you can find me
on Twitter or on what Jay thinks there's
a contact page and you can send stuff
there
um send me dilemmas send me people you
want to have on the show uh I love being
challenged with that kind of new stuff
and maybe maybe one episode uh in season
two we'll just do a User submitted
dilemma and just take it on ourselves so
I don't know what can I say thank you
for for listening and um until next time
until next time thanks
hey Jay here actually not quite the end
of season one you're probably noticing
there's a little time left on your
playhead
um I I I don't do a ton of editing and
haven't done a ton of editing of cutting
things out in these interviews if you've
seen it sort of just let them go long
and I love these in-depth conversations
and
um with Professor Deutsch who I'm
clearly a big fan of I continued talking
for a bit after the end as we were
wrapping up and we get into some pretty
fun conversations about what he worries
about and Trump and other little things
so I'm just going to include it here
sort of bonus material so enjoy and you
you're going to hear a little laughing
from uh from in the background of my
girlfriend who have to thank for coming
along on a few of these interviews and
helping me and taking notes and and
helping me when I forget things
um you'll hear that and then just to
preface this thing that we talk about
briefly here again I encourage everybody
to go read the book beginning of
infinity it's just incredible there's a
chapter in the middle of it where he he
breaks into just this amazing kind of
play with Socrates in conversation
and we reference that chapter about
Socrates in the middle so anyway that
puts into context the next little bit
I'm gonna just play it to the end this
is me and David Deutsch the end of
season one enjoy I love you all see you
in season two bye foreign
I kind of failed to remember it there
was some sentence I was looking for this
morning about I could have sworn that
you came to some like if there's one
commandment in the universe it's
something yeah like that's that's in the
Socrates dialogue it's in the Socrates
dialogue I couldn't find it this morning
yeah I mean what was the line there that
you came to well it was sort of thing if
that I wouldn't put it in his mouth so I
wouldn't have to say it
if there is a an ultimate basis for
Morality it must be not to destroy the
means of correcting errors yeah and you
but you are you passing the buck there
little to Socrates just to give yourself
I'm still passing the buck because it
it's if you take that too literally it
purports to be a foundation for Morality
whether or not it's a foundation whether
or not there's something to morality
other than epistemology that that's
another way of putting this is there
something to morality other than
epistemology
and if
if there isn't then you don't you don't
need a foundation I mean the issue of
the foundation doesn't come up because
it just you know there's no Foundation
to epistemology right so it morality is
just a matter of epistemology which
doesn't have a foundation so that's fine
problems exist in one person in One mind
so you have problems the implications
for other people
uh come from the nature of knowledge
it for example
you need institutions to grow knowledge
and institutions have to involve other
people and they have to survive the
deaths of those people so that already
puts heavy constraints on what you
should think about institutions
and that has implications for
law and morality and politics and and
and interpersonal relationships and and
society and so on so but but it it all
comes down to conditions for solving
problems and problems are in individual
Minds I I don't have any truck with
the benefit of the universe you know it
it the universe is is is
doesn't have opinions it doesn't and if
it did have that that wouldn't
it's like saying you should do what God
says you know it's it's not a superhuman
thing that can tell us what to do
it doesn't even have opinions but even
if it did it wouldn't have the right to
tell us what to do
uh and and nor do I believe that the
needs of the many outweigh the needs of
the few except when they do that except
when that is the right thing and you're
only gauging that right thing again by
like let's say promoting conditions
where errors can be protected and
corrected yes if our society collapses
uh if civilization is going to come to
an end it will not be by reverting to a
static Society it will instead
disintegrate it will just be
progress will cease but it won't be
replaced by by orthodoxies
that mode has been destroyed by by the
west by the existence of the West even
present-day static societies
pretend not to be they they and they
don't entirely suppress
uh progress they they only suppress
progress away from their obedience to
the to the rulers but that's not how
static societies worked in static
societies the rulers were as much slaves
to the memes as anyone else
uh so I I don't think that will happen
and and I also don't think that our
society shows any sign of being doomed
they've always been fads and they've
always been retrograde
motion in various ways
um you know in in in the 1920s and 30s
there was the Ku Klux Klan and and in my
memory children were being beaten in
school with with Keynes and today that's
illegal
so so we went from something being
compulsory to something being illegal
within one lifetime that's amazing and
there there are dozens of cases like
there's not only not only that there are
dozens of ways in which society has
improved both in its laws and in its
opinions and its morality and everything
now some things have gone backwards
um but I think that on the whole
um things have still been it's been
improving now unlike Stephen Pinker I
don't say things have been improving in
the same breath as saying I think they
will continue to improve that's a
fallacy
um when the when if things ever get
worse it will be
from a moment when they shall have been
at their best ever
so by definition so you just because
things are improving doesn't say
anything about what's going to happen
but I think that the the signs are not
there I think people are unnecessarily
panicking about things like
Trump and and
global warming right and uh and
political correctness and and so on the
all those things are
uh retrograde steps but they are on a
smaller scale than than ones that we've
had before they're not really something
to worry about yeah
so do what do you worry about if
anything uh the asteroid I mean I read
that person yeah yeah weapons and mass
destruction in the hands of terrorists
right that's that's a thing to worry
about yeah yeah
um and I I think I I fear that that is a
catastrophe is going to happen before we
do anything
but this is a catastrophe you know a few
million people killed
is kind of
small compared with the stuff that
happened all the time in the 20th
century
so it's still
we're still better off we we if we are
scared of terrorists nuking New York
uh that's still a fear of of an order of
magnitude less than the fear that the
Nazis would invade Britain right
yeah well okay good it's a Rosy picture
anyway yeah
um kind of yeah no
um yeah well I don't know I could talk
to you all day but I should probably let
you go we've been going about an hour
and a half it was very pleasant yeah no
it was really fun
uh yeah and I don't know how much again
we helped uh where were the names Andre
and Leslie the the parents we disapprove
of their action but it's about the best
we can do is
conjecturing that it's probably a moral
Mis I think maybe we can we can um
uh do some opinion polls among the the
children uh uh who this has been done to
and see whether the children as well to
see whether
they answer like a person who is
enjoying an opportunity
or like a person who can't
bring themselves to think of anything
different
uh we should be doing this with also
with a much more numerous kinds of
children who are being brought up in in
religious ideologies and madrasas and
and things like that yeah so if you had
like a
future qualia machine
for the let's say this child it happens
to them and they're reporting to you
like that they're pretty happy but they
don't they've never had the qualia of
hearing and then you somehow delivered
it to them in a in a meaningful way and
You Were Somehow sure set aside the
problem of other Minds for a second
you're somehow sure that they're
experiencing it and then they still say
yeah I don't want that I'm good then
you've gotten your your action yes well
it actually matters yes I don't think we
have to wait for that futuristic case
there will always be children who were
deaf were brought up deaf not because
their parents did it to them but because
they actually were and who then regained
their hearing and there will be then and
the parents may have had a moral dilemma
about whether to approve some of them
will have approved it some of them will
have approved approved it with
trepidation thinking that their their
child will then lose his Moorings and
and so on you could ask that child you
could ask those parents for that matter
and this will
so this will either change the debate
and that subculture will change its mind
right
or it will make obvious what a future
law should say it seems I mean if you've
seen videos of people like getting
Cochlear implants for the first time and
it's emotional I mean they're beautiful
videos yeah it seems like an obvious one
the only thing to throw sort of a little
poison in that well is that
Andre and Leslie worry that their child
will connect with them less if they can
hear oh well that's not that cool lots
of parents worry that the children don't
connect with them enough that that is
not their business Yeah well yeah that's
the last thing that I could I could give
them is saying like so is there any sort
of special privilege as a parent you
have over the autonomy of your child no
you have any special obligations not
special privileges and that might be the
the kicker for them to just be like too
bad you should try the calculator plan
too so I guess what would you say to the
parents yeah like it's probably great
um cool thanks Professor deutsches it
was awesome and a huge huge honor again
I'm a huge well thank you it was fun
thanks